Frank: D'Alembert

D'A in physics: partition causes of dynamics into direct forces and changes in frame of reference
In evolution: direct force of natural selection and changing environmental frame of reference

===
Masel: Eco-evolutionary “fitness” in 3 dimensions: absolute growth, 
absolute efficiency, and relative competitiveness
http://arxiv.org/pdf/1407.1024v4.pdf

r-K model, but separate K into parsimonious cooperative resource use and c, competitive ability

The flourishing field of eco-evolutionary dynamics studies how ecologically meaningful
traits evolve (Kokko and López-Sepulcre, 2007; Pelletier et al., 2009; Reznick and Ghalambor,
2001; Schoener, 2011; Thompson, 1998)

"I propose a new model for the fitness of a genotype." !

"Phenomenological" vs "mechanistic" for my "ecological" vs "phenotypic" traits

different mechanisms can give rise to the same phenomenological model, in a manner that changes the interpretation of the phenomenological parameters (Geritz and Kisdi, 2012).

Innovation in resource partitioning might or might not be common in ecological speciation. However, there are reasons to believe that it is rare in adaptation. Its appearance in Lenski’s experiments (Blount et al., 2008), involving the ability to exploit citrate as a result of gene duplication and associated promoter capture leading to altered regulation of the new ortholog (Blount et al., 2012), was a spectacular and newsworthy occurrence, rather than a “garden-variety” adaptation.

A territorial interpretation conforms to the original intent of the “logistique” equation; it
described the availability of farmland or “logements” for human cultivation (Verhulst, 1845)

My Eq. 2 can be seen as a special case of Eq. 5 that is obtained by setting α ij =K i /K j

cites G-functions (Cohen et al., 1999; Vincent et al., 1993), not A.D.?

if competitive relative fitness comes with an absolute fitness cost, then “evolutionary suicide”, as a special case of the tragedy of the commons, can sometimes occur (Ferrière, 2000; Haldane, 1932; Matsuda and Abrams, 1994; Parvinen and Dieckmann, 2013; Rankin et al., 2011; Rankin and López-Sepulcre, 2005)

One version of this hypothesis can be seen as isomorphic with Grime’s (1977) universal
adaptive strategy theory

a number of empirical studies, in direct contradiction to MacArthur’s
hypothesis of an r-K tradeoff, have found that r and K are positively correlated

"rotation" vs analysis of correlations/tradeoffs. I will add geometric fitness gradient analysis.  I should consider her model as well as the one I used.  Also add discussion of indirect effects in her model.  Also consider suggesting her to review.	

not only phenotype, but fitness itself is a multi-dimensional construct: both relative and absolute competition

see appendix reviewing eco-evolutionary dynamics/fitness

===
Adaptive walks on changing landscapes: Levins’ approach extended
C. Rueffler, T.J.M. Van Dooren, and J.A.J. Metz

extend Levins's paper to include density/frequency dependence

optimization is generally impossible in the presence of frequency dependence (Fisher, 1930)

see also appendix of de Mazancourt et al. (2001).

each time the seashore changes such that all types of the new coalition
reside again on the shoreline (Marrow et al., 1992)

CSS, mutual invasibility, garden of eden, repellor, etc

Pairwise-invasion plots and sort of analogous plots in constrained 2-d space

examples from other papers = useful

"models which include any type of density dependence and thereby give rise to frequency-dependent selection"? - clarify

shape of trade-off curve + shape/curvature of invasion boundary
invasion boundary similar to Levins's contours but frequency dependent.

citations for shape of tradeoff curve in life-history theory

Looks like no invasion fitness gradient.

question of more than 2 trait dimensions not dealt with
"it remains open how the presented results can be extended using more elaborate differential geometry."

Do they have the covariance matrix Gamma?  No

===
The geometric theory of adaptive evolution: trade-off and invasion plots
Bowers et al 2005

TIP: trade-off and invasion plot

See Gatto 1993 for specific paper with lots of tradeoff analysis in it

At a given (resident) point of the TO curve, draw invasion boundary when variant varies,
and when resident varies.

It needs coloring or something to show which side of each curve is which

Lee Worden doesn't care about classification of singular points

No fitness gradient

===
Evolutionary Behaviour, Trade-Offs and Cyclic and Chaotic Population Dynamics
Hoyle et al 2010

In fixed-point population dynamics, it's concave vs convex tradeoff curve for adaptive dynamics.

When pop dyn has a 2-cycle there's an intermediate range that has branching

===
Evolutionary behaviour in ecological systems with trade-offs and non-equilibrium population dynamics
White, Greenman, Benton, Boots

trade-offs with accelerating costs -> CSS, decelerating costs -> repellor. True also when population oscillations are small.

===
The influence of trade-off shape on evolutionary behaviour in classical
ecological scenarios
Hoyle et al 2007

TIPs for standard models

See life-history theory for WHY traits are traded off in cost-benefit relationship

single species, two stages
birth rate vs juvenile m OR adult m OR competition parameter; or birth rate vs maturation rate

multispecies, single class
competition OR mutualism OR pred.prey.
using LV form
details need more reading here

multispecies, multiple classes
SI host/parasite
(parasite modeled implicitly in I class)
analyze only adaptation of host?

What is Bulmer 1994?

There are 4 distinct fundamental TIPs

interesting discussion of criteria on interactions for branching

see White, A., Bowers, R.G., 2005. Adaptive dynamics of Lotka–Volterra
systems with trade-offs: the role of intraspecific parameter dependence
in branching. Math. Bios. 197, 101–117.

===
Can possible evolutionary outcomes be determined directly from the
population dynamics?
Hoyle and Bowers 2008

geometric approaches to AD: Rueffler et al., 2004; De Mazancourt and Dieckmann,
2004; Bowers et al., 2005; Geritz et al. (2007), Hoyle and Bowers (2007)

TIPs again.

===
Trade-Off Geometries and Frequency-Dependent Selection
Mazancourt, Dieckmann, 2004

trade-off curve vs. invasion fitness contours + selection gradients

"A-boundary" (thin line) = boundary of region attainable by invasion+replacement steps
"I-boundary" (dashed line) = boundary of region that can invade

interchangeable except to distinguish CSS/repellor/branching point by comparing curvature of these things.

only for one-dimensional constraint curve

===
Evolutionary branching and long-term coexistence of cycling predators:
Critical function analysis
Geritz, Kisdi, Yan, 2007

Coexistence of two predators on single prey, via fluctuations.  Enabled by some
shapes of trade-off curve.

"critical function analysis": if tradeoff curve ("gamma") is tangent to c.f., it's at a singular point.

There is a critical slope for gamma at every point.  Critical function is chosen to have
that slope at every point.

"The critical functions give a quick visual way to identify
evolutionarily singular strategies and their convergence
stability once a trade-off function g(h) is given."

===
Adaptive Responses to Environmental Threats: Evolutionary Suicide, Insurance, and Rescue
Ferrière, 2000

evolution can cause dissolution of relationship (extinction of predator) or self-extinction of both (?) - can cause self-extinction.

"Natural selection has molded this kind of mutualistic interaction to resist dissolution or extinction potentially caused by 'cheaters' that reap the mutualistic commodities without providing much benefit in return"

"Suicide" vs "Rescue" (odd terms).  AD can drive population to no dispersal or all dispersal.  When environment changes, all dispersal becomes evolutionary trap, extinction.

===
Joint evolution of altruistic cooperation and dispersal in a
metapopulation of small local populations
Kalle Parvinen, 2013

joint evolution of public goods cooperation and dispersal

4 outcomes, good and bad, depending on parameters

===
Eight personal rules for doing science: Commentary
Metz

The picture emerging from
constructional morphology and evo-devo is one of very
high dimensional trait spaces and very ridgy fitness
landscapes. Because of the high dimension of the trait
space, the top of the ridges may be higher dimensional,
although relatively low dimensional compared with the
off-ridge directions. The slopes at the top of the ridges are
the domain of ecology and thus of AD, whereas their
overall location is largely ecology independent. The
combination of this picture with an argument in the
spirit of Fisher’s argument on curvature effects in high
dimensional spaces (Fisher, 1930; revived and extended
by Rice, 1990), suggests that the parameter regions
where the limit procedures favoured by AD work well,
should contain their fair share of real cases, as by far the
most mutations, and in particular those with large effect,
end up in the fitness abyss.

Wright’s gradient dynamics
(Wright, 1937a,b) is defined on a space of gene frequen-
cies as opposed to phenotypes. Russ Lande’s gradient
dynamics (Lande, 1976, 1982) deals with biologically
similar problems but rests on a mathematically different
foundation, as it considers a different limiting regime.

===
THE ADAPTIVE DYNAMICS OF ALTRUISM IN SPATIALLY
HETEROGENEOUS POPULATIONS
Galliard 2003

abstraction of altruism: cost-benefit curve.  evolution on blank landscape.

finds three different selective processes controlling the
evolution of altruism: the direct physiological cost, the indirect genetic benefits of cooperative interactions, and the indirect genetic costs of competition for space

correlating altruism with mobility can -> selection-driven self-extinction

===
On Mutualists and Exploiters: Plant+insect Coevolution in Pollinating
Seed+parasite Systems
Law et al 2001

selection on time of flowering, time of pollinator emergence
late emergence = more predation, less pollination

insect population can branch
later-emerging insects are more exploitative

3-level dynamics (pollination season modeled within discrete-time population dynamics), so probably not reducible to LV.  But maybe can be modeled by a LV approximation.

===
Evolutionary dynamics of altruism and cheating
among social amoebas
Brännström, 2005

Cheater strategies in the slime molds?!

evolutionary branching to coexisting stalked and stalkless fruiting bodies

also pretty nonlinear model, needs some deciphering

note use of "selection gradient"

S_r(m) [= I(m|r)] = lim_{a_m\to 0+} a'_m(a^*_r,a_m) / a_m

S_r'(r) = mu D'(r)/D(r) - 1/(1-r)

mu = a certain expectation over p_k values

p_k = whatever, just make assumptions about mean mu and sd sigma

D(r) = a fixed nonlinear fn of r

Branching, via S_r'', depends on sigma as well as mu.

Interestingly, no population dynamics eqns?

==
Resource allocation: a conflict in the fig/fig wasp mutualism?
Anstett, Bronstein, Hossaert-McKey, 1996

No model.

Tree must balance seed production with pollinator offspring production.  Wasps don't care about seed production, at least not directly.

Experimental data on production of seeds, wasps given various conditions.

Hypothesized mechanisms for tree strategy, discussion of evolutionary consequences.

If figs limit wasp production -> arms race with wasps
If a wasp trait limits it -> wasps aren't selected to take all flowers, production not limited by fig traits

...

long-styled flowers may be protected against oviposition

Offspring fitness vs number of offspring

Could be a CSS strategy for wasps trading off egg laying with cost of long ovipositor
===
The Costs of Mutualism
Bronstein, 

===
Population Dynamics and Mutualism: Functional Responses of Benefits and Costs
J. Nathaniel Holland, Donald L. DeAngelis, and Judith L. Bronstein, 2002

cactus/pollinating moth is case study here

nice collection of citations

type 2 response = LV dynamics: Roughgarden 1983; Wolin 1985; DeAngelis et al. 1986

===
Constraints on the Evolution of Mutualisms
Henry Howe, 1984

Verbal reasoning on when pairwise coevolution of mutualisms ought to work in communities.
1. diversity diffuses selection, making pairwise coevolution harder
2. selective regimes change over evolutionary time
3. heterogeneity -> general rather than specific relationships
4. hard to match rates of adaptation between the 2 species

===
A Simple Model of Mutualism
Dean, 1983

population dynamics model with stable carrying capacity (though maybe not always when
mutualism is obligate)
===
Evolution of Marine Symbiosis - A simple cost-benefit model
Roughgarden, 1975

incentives from the guest's point of view: when to do; facultative vs obligatory for guest; guest activity; how much activity

literally balancing costs C and benefits to get a net fitness <=> 1

Could redo i.t.o. fns of phenotypes, more visual, might be interesting
===
Seek more Bronstein papers
Take Noe-Hammerstein notes

== 
The Ecology of Mutualism
Boucher 1982

"an interaction between species that is beneficial to both"

"We make the normal apologies concerning forcing continuous variation and diverse
interactions into simple dichotomous classifications"

"how to define 'benefit to the species'"
* + relative fitness of individual organisms
* population-level effect over balance of + and - fitness effects

direct and indirect; symbiotic and non-symbiotic

name possibly comes from mutualite societes

cases of symbiotic mutualisms, including some discussion of tradeoffs
evolution: proximity -> s.m.
sometimes from parasitism
or ingestion

nonsymbiotic; pollination etc
dispersal; protection; foraging help; sort of helpful "apparent predation"

theories of emergence of mutualism:
individual cost-benefit selection; pop. dyn. models + stability; shift from mutualism to pred or comp; "keystone mutualist"
review of models in detail, including much useful stuff
Boucher graphical model of seed consumption, mut vs pred

distribution of mutualisms across regions, communities

Wilson on "classic group selection problem"

so many references!

mutualisms can be formed without evolution

"indirect mutualism" via mutual antagonist, and such things

===
Negotiation of Mutualism: Rhizobia and Legumes
Akcay + Roughgarden, 2007

From bargaining theory
Growth rates as payoffs; collective bargaining between firm and workers' union
Nash bargaining solution: max product of payoffs

===
Our current understanding of mutualism
Bronstein, 1994

===
Mutualism (book)
Bronstein, 2015

